# Introduction to Biology and Molecular Biology

We will cover the overview of molecular biology, including the central
dogma, the structures and functions of key biomolecules, and the role of
gene expression in cellular function. Then, we’ll delve into genes and
genomes, types of RNA, and the intricate mechanisms of gene expression
regulation.

## Overview of Molecular Biology

Molecular biology is the branch of biology that seeks to understand the
molecular basis of biological activity, particularly how genetic
information is stored, replicated, and expressed to drive cellular
processes. At its core lies the **central dogma of molecular biology**,
a foundational theory proposed by Francis Crick in 1958 and refined over
decades. This dogma describes the unidirectional flow of genetic
information: from DNA to RNA to protein. In essence, DNA serves as the
blueprint, RNA as the intermediary messenger, and proteins as the
functional workhorses of the cell.

To elaborate, during **transcription**, a segment of DNA is copied into
RNA by the enzyme RNA polymerase, producing a complementary RNA strand.
This RNA, if it’s messenger RNA (mRNA), then undergoes **translation**
in the cytoplasm, where ribosomes read the RNA sequence in groups of
three nucleotides (codons) to assemble amino acids into proteins. While
the central dogma is generally unidirectional, exceptions exist, such as
reverse transcription in retroviruses, where RNA is converted back to
DNA by reverse transcriptase. This framework is crucial because it
explains how genetic information is preserved and utilized, forming the
basis for fields like genomics and transcriptomics.

Next, let’s examine **the structure and function of DNA, RNA, and
proteins**. DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, is a double-stranded helical
molecule composed of nucleotides—each consisting of a deoxyribose sugar,
a phosphate group, and one of four nitrogenous bases: adenine (A),
thymine (T), cytosine (C), or guanine (G). The strands are held together
by hydrogen bonds between complementary bases (A-T and C-G), allowing
for stable storage and faithful replication during cell division. DNA’s
primary function is to store genetic information, which can be passed
from one generation to the next.

RNA, or ribonucleic acid, differs in several ways: it’s typically
single-stranded, uses ribose sugar, and replaces thymine with uracil
(U). This single-stranded nature allows RNA to fold into complex
three-dimensional structures, enabling diverse functions beyond mere
information transfer. Proteins, on the other hand, are polymers of amino
acids linked by peptide bonds. Their structure unfolds in levels:
primary (sequence of amino acids), secondary (alpha helices and beta
sheets), tertiary (3D folding), and quaternary (multi-subunit
assemblies). Proteins execute a vast array of functions, including
catalysis (enzymes), structural support (collagen), transport
(hemoglobin), and signaling (hormones).

The **role of gene expression** in cellular function cannot be
overstated. Gene expression is the process by which the genetic code in
DNA is converted into functional products, primarily proteins, that
dictate a cell’s identity, behavior, and response to its environment. In
a multicellular organism, all cells share the same genome, yet they
differentiate into specialized types—such as neurons, muscle cells, or
immune cells—through selective gene expression. For instance, in
response to environmental signals like hormones or stress, cells can
upregulate or downregulate specific genes to adapt, such as activating
heat shock proteins during temperature stress. Dysregulated gene
expression underlies many diseases, including cancer, where oncogenes
are overexpressed. In transcriptomics, we study the RNA products of gene
expression to map these dynamic patterns, revealing insights into health
and disease.

## Genes and Genomes

Moving on, let’s define what a **gene** is and explore its components. A
gene is a functional unit of heredity, essentially a segment of DNA that
encodes the information necessary to produce a specific RNA molecule,
which may then be translated into a protein. In eukaryotes, genes are
more complex, comprising several key elements. The **promoter** is a
regulatory region upstream of the coding sequence where RNA polymerase
and transcription factors bind to initiate transcription. **Exons** are
the coding segments that are retained in the mature mRNA and translated
into protein, while **introns** are non-coding intervening sequences
that are spliced out during RNA processing. This exon-intron structure
allows for flexibility in gene expression, as we’ll discuss later. For
example, the human beta-globin gene has three exons and two introns,
encoding the hemoglobin subunit.

Now, consider the **structure of eukaryotic and prokaryotic genomes**.
Eukaryotic genomes are large, linear, and organized into multiple
chromosomes within the nucleus, with extensive non-coding regions,
repetitive sequences, and introns making up the bulk of the DNA. The
human genome, for instance, spans about 3 billion base pairs across 23
chromosome pairs, with only about 1-2% coding for proteins. In contrast,
prokaryotic genomes are compact, typically consisting of a single
circular chromosome in the cytoplasm, with high coding density (up to
90%) and operons—clusters of genes transcribed together for coordinated
expression. Bacterial genomes like that of Escherichia coli are around
4-5 million base pairs, lacking introns and focusing on efficiency.
These structural differences reflect evolutionary adaptations:
eukaryotes prioritize complex regulation for multicellularity, while
prokaryotes emphasize rapid response in single-celled environments.

An essential layer beyond DNA sequence is **epigenetics and its
influence on gene expression**. Epigenetics refers to heritable
modifications that affect gene activity without changing the underlying
DNA sequence. Key mechanisms include DNA methylation, where methyl
groups are added to cytosine residues, often silencing genes by blocking
transcription factor access, and histone modifications, such as
acetylation (which loosens chromatin for activation) or methylation
(which can repress or activate depending on the site). These changes are
dynamic and responsive to environmental factors, like diet or stress,
influencing development, aging, and disease. For example, aberrant DNA
methylation in promoter regions can lead to tumor suppressor gene
silencing in cancer. Epigenetics adds a regulatory dimension to the
transcriptome, as it determines which genes are accessible for
transcription.
